# Compilation & Memory Management

## Cross-Compiling

- Not all embedded systems have:
  - a compiler
  - an editor
  - a debugger
  - etc.

We use **cross-compilation** for developing code for embedded systems.

Cross-compiling requires a Build Platform & Host Platform.

## Why C?

- Most OSs in current use are written in C
- Standard POSIX (Portable Operating System Interface) defines calls to OS in C language

## Stages of compiling a C program

Pre-processing, Compiling, Assembly, Linking -> Executable.

### Stage 1: Pre-processing

Processing done purely at the textual level (.cpp_out file):
- Remove comments
- Process pre-processing directives (ex: include)
  - Replace the include with the file contents
  - Defines meaning are replaced in the code

### Stage 2: Compiling

Converts the C program into Assembly (.s file).

### Stage 3: Assembly

Converting from Assembly to a binary representation (Machine code).

Results in a object file (.o) which is not executable. It contains unreslved symbols and addresses as an offser relative to the location of main().

```
# Dis-assemble (reverse stage 3)
objdump -h hello.o
```

### Stage 4: Linking

Link output file to required libraries.

Results in an executable file with defined memory addresses, it may or not be result in executable code.

When we wish to execute the same program twice or more times, virtual memory is needed, since the starting memory address is the same.

## Using libraries

**Static Linking**:
In static linking the code from external libraries is included in the final executable file.

**Dynamic Linking**:
While in dynamic linking we need the library code available to run, i.e we create a pointer to the library functions in the final program.
In Linux, the files have the '.so' extension (Shared object), and in Windows '.dll' (Dynamically Linked Library).

In cross-compiling (static linking), the compilation process is the same as above.

While in dynamic linking the lib needs to be well pointed in the host platform and therefore, it must be moved with the executable program.

## Lazy vs Normal loading

When a dynamic object is loaded into memory, the object is examined for any additional dependencies. By default, any dependencies that exist are immediately loaded. These operations are performed regardless of whether the code in these dependencies is referenced by the application during its execution.

Under a lazy loading model, dependencies are loaded only when explicitly referenced. By taking advantage of the lazy binding of a function call, the loading of a dependency is delayed until the function is first referenced. As a result, objects that are never referenced are never loaded.

## Dynamic linking controlled at runtime

It is possible to programmatically load a dynamic library with `dlopen` in linux and `LoadLibrary` in windows. 


## Memory management in C programs

A program uses memory to store:
- Global vars
- Local Vars
- Dynamically allocated memory

All of theses vars are store in the global var, stack and heap sections.

## How the parameters are passed to functions

ABI - Aplication Binary Interface.
Depends on the architecture, an tells how parameters are passed to functions (ex: in the stack, others).

# Hardware

## Spectrum

- FPGA / ASIC
- Micro Controllers
- Micro Processors
- System on a Chip - SOC
- Single Board Computer - SBC

Increases in cost per unit, but decreases in development costs.

The first allows to configure a set of transistors for specific purposes.

The microprocessor is capable of doing arithmetic and has a cache, while a microcontroller does not have an MMU (memory management unit). 

SBC may be something like a raspberry pi, and SOC have a bunch of peripheries.

## Development process

Host platforms may have boot loaders which allow to save the built program in there. While others may allow to communicate via secure shell or others.

## ARM CPUs

- A Profile (Application)
  - General purpose applications
- R Profile (Real-Time)
  - Suports a protected memory system architecture (PMSA) based on a memory protection unit (MPU, simpler than a MMU), which partitions memory
- M Profile (Microcontroller)
  - Low latency, highly deterministic operation for deeply embedded systems

## Processor Modes

Priviledge modes allow processors to run only parts of system functions. Allowing for the safety of the MMU unit, since processes cannot access other memory positions.

User spaces vs Kernel spaces, permits for distinguishing spaces strictly reserved for running privileged operating system functions.